Baltimore, Baltimore, Baltimore.
So, ladies and gentlemen, some of you may know Jeff from online
courses. I'm going to hand over to him. Please, a warm round of
applause.
I'm super excited to be here. This is my very first RStudio
conf. Thank you so much for the invite. I'm going to talk about
a project we've been doing in Baltimore to use data science to
create new economic opportunities.
We rely heavily on tools developed by RStudio, so I'm
really grateful for all the help they've helped us do over the
last couple of years. I talk super fast, so you're going to
see a lot of slides. If you want to follow along or look at them
later, you can find them at this website.
So, first, I wanted to thank a lot of people who took a gamble
on this project, and in particular, I really wanted to
thank four people, Shannon Ellis, Abuzar Ahadavan, Jamie
McGovern, and Ashley Johnson, who I had this completely
harebrained idea to do this project, and they all gambled on
it. So, thank you to all of them.
I'm going to turn it over to them.
Thank you.
So, I'm going to turn it over to the other people who gambled
on me with the project, and I really appreciate their time,
and then you'll hear about some of the other people that have
gambled on us, and hopefully it's paid off for them.
So, they're the real MVPs of the talk that I am giving to here.
I'm just the mouthpiece.
So, this whole project has felt a lot like this.
This is a project, I'll tell you, that has a lot of moving
parts, and it's felt like, you know, throughout the project,
we're a train going down a track, and we're rapidly trying
to get debris off the track so that we don't go off.
And all the people that I just showed you a minute ago are
people that helped us solve problems.
So, we're going to talk a little bit about the project.
So, as you probably heard or know, or you've read about in
the news recently, income inequality is a big problem in
the world.
And I work in a school of public health, and it turns out
income inequality is also a public health problem.
If you look, this is actual real data.
I know the line is so straight, it looks like I made it up.
This is real data.
It is the relationship between how much money you make and
what your life expectancy is based on census records for the
entire United States.
If you make, at the 80th anniversary of the Great Depression,
if you make $10,000 a year, if you make $10,000 a year,
if you make, at the 80th percentile, on average,
you live between five and seven years longer than people who
make at the 20th percentile.
This is a correlation, of course, not causation,
but this is an incredibly tight correlation,
and it also relates to every other public health consequence
that you might imagine.
So, at the same time that economic inequality could cause
some concern for us about public health differences and
disparities, economic mobility is also at a record low.
So, this is a map produced by the Harvard group,
and it's a map of the population.
So, this is a map of the population,
So, this is a map produced by the Harvard group,
Raj Chetty's group, looking at economic mobility
in the United States.
And this is the neighborhood around where I work
at Johns Hopkins.
Johns Hopkins is a massive, multibillion-dollar institution
with a lot of very well-paid doctors,
but the median income for a person that grows up in the
neighborhood around our hospital is $18,000 for a family
at the age of 34.
So, that, and not only that, but the chance of going from
that income to going up to a higher level of income
is very small.
This isn't just a problem in cities.
This is, I grew up in Pocatello, Idaho,
which is a random little town in Idaho,
and there's a similar, hey, there's some Pocatellans,
find me later.
So, and this is a similar kind of economic mobility
challenge, even in rural parts of the United States.
It turns out that the best way to solve the economic
mobility problem, the best intervention anybody's ever
invented is education, but it turns out that you need
access to education in order to be able to take advantage
of this intervention.
So, if you see a plot on the x-axis,
how easy it is to get into a university,
and on the y-axis, how easy it is to get into a
university, and on the y-axis, how likely it is
you'll be in the 80th percentile or above
of income after you finish, you see that there's
this kind of L shape.
The easier it is to get into, the less money you make
when you get out.
The harder it is to get into, the more money you'll
make when you get out.
Technical education obviously breaks this trend
and gives us an opportunity to inexpensive education
and move people up the economic mobility ladder.
This whole project is predicated on the hypothesis
that talent is evenly distributed,
but opportunity isn't.
So, we've been teaching data science online
for a little while now.
We've taught more than 5 million people
on the Coursera platform in just straight data science
using R.
We've also taught 6 million plus across a variety
of different data science modalities,
and so that's something we're really excited about
and we're really proud of.
But one thing that we wanted to know is,
could people use these programs to improve
their economic prospects?
So, we did a study, and we looked at what people's
income was before they took our program and after,
and the dots, which you probably can't see too well,
but are up in this top left-hand corner,
are people who had below-poverty-level income
but ended up at above the 80th percentile of income
after taking a $1,000 online program
that they took in their spare time.
That was a very, very small subset
of our Coursera students,
but it's a pretty inspiring subset of those Coursera students.
So, it turns out, though, that almost everybody
that takes our Coursera classes
are already educated.
You know, the most common user
of one of our Coursera classes is an upper-middle-class
white male Silicon Valley engineer,
so there's probably a few around here,
which is great, and we love educating those folks,
but it's not reaching the broad audience.
So, even if you build it,
they won't necessarily come to the massive online open courses.
So, we started thinking about,
from first principles, how do we take somebody
who's maybe never heard of data science
and turn them into a functioning data scientist
who can get a job and improve their economic prospects?
So, these are the challenges that we came up with.
Shannon and Abuzar and Sean,
who's sitting here in the front,
got back in my office a few years ago.
And so, we thought
an expensive computer is a challenge.
It's been said that a data scientist
is a statistician working on a MacBook Pro.
That'll run you about $3,000
for a MacBook Pro, but if your income last year
as a family was $5,000,
you're not buying a MacBook Pro.
So, we wanted to build a program that could be run on any computer
that has an internet connection and a web browser.
So, this is where we relied heavily.
We were the initial beta testers.
Tarif and Robby helped us out a lot,
got us on RStudio Cloud, helped us scale this whole program.
That was the only way we would be able to do that.
So, we've been doing data science
on a Chromebook for a while.
You can do it with Google Slides, Google Sheets,
but the real hero of this story in terms of technology
is RStudio Cloud.
So, we ran our whole new MOOC sequence.
We built an entirely new MOOC sequence
entirely based on RStudio Cloud
so that anybody could take it.
You could go to the public library
and take our data science series on the web browser.
Then you'd have to know about data science.
I've talked to a lot of the people in the community
where we have run this program.
They've never heard of that.
They don't know it's a thing.
They don't know you could do something with it.
They don't know you could improve your life with it.
So, we had to tell people about that,
and again, this is the same problem we had before.
Most people who are taking these online courses
are already educated, so they hear about data science.
This is not exclusive to us.
If you've heard of a data science boot camp
or Lambda School or any of these other things,
if you look at the data on who's being educated
among already educated folks.
So, we went out and partnered
with a nonprofit in East Baltimore
just off the block where we work,
Historic East Baltimore Community Action Coalition,
and so they're amazing,
and they have a GED training program,
and so they also have access to a catchment area
of a lot of really talented youth
who maybe had not heard about data science.
So, we worked with them to identify some people
and to tell them about data science.
Then we needed an appropriate program.
So, the cool thing about the tools
that have been built by R
is that with a relatively little amount of overhead,
you can go from nothing to magic,
and so we can compress training programs
that make people very capable
down into very short periods of time.
With this much code,
you can build a funny little website.
you can build an interactive dashboard
on the NHANES data.
With this much code,
you can access a gigantic database
and process thousands and thousands
and you can scrape data
or connect to APIs,
all of the things that the packages have been.
We've been early adopters of all of them.
So, we built a program called Cloud-Based Data Science.
Anybody can take it.
It's online, it's free.
Go to clouddatascience.org.
We have tons of people taking it all over the world,
but we also partnered
with this nonprofit
to run the program locally in Baltimore.
So, we had our content development
starting in February 2018.
We had our first meeting with Yode,
the Hebcax training program.
They said, hey, this is great.
We should start tomorrow.
We had started content development on February 2018,
so we said, maybe next month?
And they said, okay, May 21st it is.
So, remember,
I had to build a whole training program
and we had a month to do it.
So, this was me
in my office after that meeting
trying to figure out how we would do it.
Fortunately, we had this amazing team
of people who developed content
for us in a distributed way,
and Shannon Ellis and Abuzar Hadavan
deserve the lion's share of the credit
in terms of content development,
but what was amazing is we actually had
technologies developed by Sean Cross
and by John Muschelli that allowed us
to develop and deploy this content very quickly.
So, then we've solved a couple of the problems,
but there are still some problems out there.
We still got to get them a computer,
access to instruction, income security.
So, we have developed
this training program
and we wanted to be able to do it very quickly
so that we could give them this kind of access.
This is a GitHub repo
that is the 34,000 repos
of our Getting and Cleaning Data final projects
for our Coursera class.
You can go online and see all the 34,000 projects
people have done.
If you look at what libraries were used
in the development of this course,
you'll notice there was a strong trend
for one package. It's the dplyr package.
This package was released the day
I released my Getting and Cleaning Data course
and rendered the entire course obsolete
on Coursera on day one.
Thanks, Hadley, very much.
Appreciate that.
So, we learned our lesson, and first,
we monitor everything that our studio people
are doing at all times while we're building courses.
But second, Sean built
some really awesome technologies that allowed us
to automatically synthesize the voices
around our videos and automatically generate
all of our videos and all of our MOOCs
from our Markdown documents and from Google Slides.
So we can recompile and re-release
new courses very, very rapidly
to be able to deploy this program.
Similarly, all of our tutorials are built
in an amazing program called Swirl,
also developed by Sean and Nick Carcetti,
who I don't think is here,
that allows us to write sort of Markdown-like,
YAML-like tutorials that people
can then interactively take in R.
So, we wanted to go after this new cohort
which comes from a different sort of
level of education and from a different background,
so we built a training program
that has in-person office hours
three hours a week, you get paid to complete
the courses, you get a free Chromebook,
and then we help you with job assistance.
I get up very, very early in the morning
because I have young kids and my post-doc goes to sleep
very, very late because he doesn't have young kids,
and so you get basically 24-hour Slack support
when you're taking our courses.
And then we partnered with
EO and they provided
the real work, which is like
wraparound services, housing support, things like that
for people who needed it.
And then we decided to run a pilot, so we ran it with
I was going to run it with 20 people, and Joe Chang came
to visit us in Baltimore and he said
that is a terrible idea, try two first.
So we did, we tried it with two people.
The learning started May 21st.
How long should the program take?
We don't know, we just made this up last week.
So, we said three months,
which is a dramatically short
timeline to learn a lot of data science,
especially for people who had never
heard of data science and were already looking at us
a little skeptically to start.
Surprisingly, even with these challenges
of us basically being behind in content
development, both of the candidates
finished the program in four months.
The new cohorts have finished in the three
months we originally projected, because now
content is done instead of
the first cohort where they weren't.
So we've had multiple cohorts go through this
and we've had an 80% success rate.
This is an incredible success
rate, given that the people that we're working with
had never heard about data science beforehand
and it's really a testament to
the incredibly talented people that we're
working with who just didn't have an opportunity to do
this, and now they pick
it up way faster. They're teaching
me stuff now.
The next challenge that we had is
we wanted to use this as an economic
intervention, but if you've ever seen a job ad
for a data scientist, these are your actual
roles and responsibilities,
but these are the job requirements.
And so,
that's a bit of a problem when we're
training people to do really powerful,
useful stuff, but the job requirements look like that.
It's true
for this, as I'm picking on someone in particular in the
Baltimore area, but this is, you know, you need a
bachelor's degree and five years of experience, and what they really
needed was somebody to look into their SQL databases
and figure out what was going on.
So, it turns out there's a problem
with us directly employing the data scientists
we've trained if they don't have a bachelor's degree.
One of the people that's completed our program
has had a bachelor's degree. He's actually
here today somewhere. There he is.
Anthony. You should go talk to him later.
And Antonio, who's also
here, completed our program,
is getting his bachelor's degree, and he's going to be a doctor
someday as fast as he possibly can.
But the Fair Labor and Standards Act
doesn't, you know, have these carve-outs
for who can be a salaried employee.
I learned a lot about HR law
through this project, and it turns out
data scientists doesn't meet the software engineering
requirement for the Fair Labor and Standards Act
to be an exempt employee.
I've talked to a lot of lawyers about this.
So, this is a problem because now
you have to hire the folks that we've trained
as hourly employees.
So I was this close. I've trained incredibly
talented people who are super smart, can do
incredible things, but
they don't have a job that they can
get because the labor laws require
them to be an hourly job, but they're being listed
as salary jobs, and so I'm in a
bit of a pickle. I work at
Hopkins, and I'm a faculty member, and
when you're a faculty member at a place like Hopkins, you can
pitch a fit and try to get them to do things for you.
And so I did that, and I have
over the last year and a half pitched enough fits
that they've created a new job classification
just last week so that people
that complete our training program can be employed
at Johns Hopkins as data scientists, so
very excited about that.
But that was, thank you very much.
Yeah, I feel like I should get the applause
for battling the HR system and winning.
So, but
in the meantime, we didn't have a place for people
to be employed even though they're super talented.
Well, it turns out a lot of people were emailing me to do data science
consulting work because I'm on Coursera all the time,
and I used to just hit delete on all those emails,
sorry, but then
I had an amazing outreach from
some folks at, this guy's
from Wyden Kennedy, and he said,
hey, right at the time when I was launching this, he
said, hey, do you want to do some stuff together?
A couple of the people from WK might be here
who we work with a lot. They're amazing.
And they, we, so we've started to work
with companies like that and to basically do
data science as a service for them.
And so what we found in doing that is
with a lot of companies, WK is one
of the best case scenarios.
In a lot of the cases we work with companies,
the main problem is the data isn't organized.
As everyone knows, 80% of the problem is data cleaning.
So we've kind of
created a product which is
tidy data as a service. We call it
Streamline, but the idea is
basically we go in and build a custom set of pipelines
that pull everybody's data in, put it in a database
every night, and so they have the clean
data that they need to use. And so
we've been deploying this,
the team, you should meet Antonio and Anthony
back, they're super talented. Hire them away
from us, please, and then I'll train more.
And so we founded
this company and we decided we were going to put it right
in the neighborhood where this is happening. So our company
is headquartered like right up the block from Hopkins.
We're hiring data scientists from this training
program, and we think of that as their first
data science opportunity, but they're so talented
that's definitely not going to be their last data science
opportunity. So this
is the project we set out to try to accomplish.
We've tackled each
of this bit by bit. It's still a little bit
held together with sticks and mud and glue
and the hard work of Anthony and Antonio and their
friends, but
we're taking a big swing at
how do we tackle getting RStudio
and R and these sort of talents, just like
Carl mentioned, how do we use this as an
engine to create economic opportunities
for people who wouldn't otherwise have them in this area
and tackle these big public health problems
head on. So
if you want to read more about this, again,
JTLeague.com slash talks, they wrote a nice little
article about us. And then
if you want to get involved, we would love for you
to reach out to us about being a mentor,
hiring a graduate of our program, becoming
a customer of our company, or donating
to help us train more people in data
science. And thank you very much for your attention.
Applause
Okay, so having set a new RStudio conf record
for syllables per second. Yes!
First question that comes
up, where can people
get training in all the stuff
you had to learn that wasn't data science?
You mentioned HR. I imagine there's a whole
bunch of other things you had to learn. To run this project?
To do things like this.
That's a good question.
I'm not sure I'd recommend
that someone go and try to learn all those things.
What it is, is, you know,
it's this, the reason why we call the company Problem Forward
is because we think about problem forward, not
solution backward. We're trying to figure out what's the problem
and then solve the barriers instead of
ending up with a solution and reverse engineering it.
And what I found in not only
this project, but every project is,
if you pick a project, an end point
or a project you really care about, a problem you really
care about, you just have to learn
a whole bunch of stuff that is unrelated.
You wish it would just be R scripting, but it never is.
Okay. Next question.
How has all of this
changed what
you teach and how you teach at the university?
Yeah, so the online
courses were actually,
I've been teaching this advanced data science course
at Johns Hopkins for years
using R and RStudio and stuff like that
before Coursera.
Then we did Coursera and now we've been,
Coursera and online programs
like LeanPub and Coursera have been kind of our
like, it's like our education labs.
We like run it there first, try it out,
see how it works, learn all the
things that go wrong when a thousand people try to
learn it that way and then kind of build it back
into our local in-person program.
It's kind of a cool, yeah, way to do that.
Okay, and one last question
and this one's from me.
If you could send email back in time
to the day you first thought of doing this,
what would you tell yourself?
So many things, but I think the first thing
that I would say is be super
grateful to all of the people that took
the gamble with you on this. Like I said, a lot of people
kind of gambled with their careers to help me do this
and I deeply appreciate that.
And then the second thing I think I would have said,
and this is a true story, is JJ
talked about creating an economic engine that allows him
to do other things first and I didn't
generate the economic engine first and that
has been challenging. I wish I had done
economic engine first, social mission
second, but, you know,
it's still working out.
I'm not sure that's a hard and fast thing, but it's
a nice idea. So, thanks.
All right, one more round of applause, please, for Jeff and his program.
Thank you, everybody.